.. _tutorial_data_generation:

Data Generation
===============

.. currentmodule:: embodichain.lab.gym

This tutorial shows how to generate synthetic expert demonstration datasets using EmbodiChain's built-in environment rollout and dataset manager. You will learn how to configure LeRobot recording in ``gym_config.json``, how ``run_env.py`` builds an environment from configuration files, and how completed episodes are automatically saved to disk.

Overview
~~~~~~~~

EmbodiChain provides a built-in data generation workflow for imitation-learning and manipulation tasks:

- **Gym Configuration**: Describes the scene, robot, sensors, randomization events, observations, dataset recorder, and rollout settings.
- **Action Configuration**: Describes the task-specific expert action graph for tasks that use the action bank.
- **Environment Rollout**: Builds the environment directly from configuration files and executes offline generation.
- **Expert Policy**: Each task provides ``create_demo_action_list()`` or another scripted policy entry to generate expert actions.
- **Dataset Manager**: Records observation-action pairs during ``env.step()``.
- **LeRobotRecorder**: Converts completed episodes into LeRobot-compatible datasets, with optional video export.

What This Tutorial Records
--------------------------

This page documents the full path from task configuration to saved dataset:

1. Prepare a task ``gym_config.json``.
2. Prepare an ``action_config.json`` if the task uses the action bank.
3. Launch the environment rollout with ``run-env``.
4. Let the dataset manager automatically save completed episodes.

Example Task
------------

As a concrete example, this tutorial uses a real action-bank task shipped in the repository:

- ``configs/gym/pour_water/gym_config.json`` defines the simulation scene and dataset recording behavior.
- ``configs/gym/pour_water/action_config.json`` defines the action-bank graph used to solve the task.

The Code
~~~~~~~~

The tutorial corresponds to the ``run_env.py`` script in ``embodichain/lab/scripts``.

.. dropdown:: Code for run_env.py
   :icon: code

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../embodichain/lab/scripts/run_env.py
      :language: python
      :linenos:


The Code Explained
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The rollout script builds the environment from configuration, generates expert trajectories, executes them step by step, and relies on the dataset manager to auto-save valid episodes.

Step 1: Prepare the Task Configuration
--------------------------------------

The first input to the pipeline is the task ``gym_config.json``. In the example below, the same file contains rollout settings, scene randomization, observations, dataset recording, and robot or sensor definitions.

The rollout settings include the episode count:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../configs/gym/pour_water/gym_config.json
   :language: json
   :lines: 2-4

The dataset-related part looks like this:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../configs/gym/pour_water/gym_config.json
   :language: json
   :lines: 261-281

Important parameters are:

- **max_episodes**: Number of rollout episodes generated by ``run_env.py``.
- **max_episode_steps**: Maximum number of environment steps per episode.
- **dataset.lerobot.params.robot_meta**: Robot metadata such as robot type and control frequency.
- **dataset.lerobot.params.instruction**: Task language instruction stored together with the dataset.
- **dataset.lerobot.params.extra**: Additional metadata such as scene type and task description.
- **dataset.lerobot.params.use_videos**: Whether camera observations should be stored as videos.
- **env.control_parts**: Controlled robot parts in the environment.


In the current implementation, ``LeRobotRecorder`` stores robot state and action features such as ``observation.qpos``, ``observation.qvel``, ``observation.qf``, ``action``, and camera images when sensors are present.

Step 2: Prepare the Action Configuration
----------------------------------------

For tasks that use the action bank, the second input is ``action_config.json``. This file defines the expert action graph consumed by ``create_demo_action_list()``. In the example below, the file is organized around ``scope``, ``node``, ``edge``, and ``sync``.

.. dropdown:: Action bank structure in the example task Pour_Water
   :icon: code

   **Scope Configuration**

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../configs/gym/pour_water/action_config.json
      :language: json
      :lines: 2-57

   **Node Configuration**

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../configs/gym/pour_water/action_config.json
      :language: json
      :lines: 96-177

   **Edge Configuration**

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../configs/gym/pour_water/action_config.json
      :language: json
      :lines: 763-790

   **Synchronization**

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../configs/gym/pour_water/action_config.json
      :language: json
      :lines: 906-932

This structure defines the expert rollout as follows:

- **Scope**: Defines controllable sub-graphs such as ``right_arm``, ``left_arm``, ``right_eef``, and ``left_eef``.
- **Node**: Defines key poses, targets computed from object affordances, and IK-generated joint targets.
- **Edge**: Defines executable transitions between nodes, including duration and execution function.
- **Sync**: Defines execution order rules between independently configured sub-actions.

Note: Action bank is not the only way to generate demonstrations. Depending on the task design, trajectories can also be produced by other scripted generation methods.

Step 3: Launch the Environment Rollout
--------------------------------------

The rollout script parses command-line arguments, loads ``gym_config.json`` and ``action_config.json``, converts them into environment configuration objects, creates the environment instance, and then runs offline rollout for ``max_episodes`` episodes:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../embodichain/lab/scripts/run_env.py
   :language: python
   :start-at: def cli():
   :end-at:     main(args, env, gym_config)

Each rollout internally calls ``create_demo_action_list()``, validates the returned sequence, executes actions with ``env.step(action)``, and discards invalid rollouts by resetting with ``save_data=False``.

The recommended CLI entrypoint is:

.. code-block:: bash

   python -m embodichain run-env \
       --gym_config configs/gym/pour_water/gym_config.json \
       --action_config configs/gym/pour_water/action_config.json \
       --headless

For interactive inspection, you can use preview mode: replace ``--headless`` with ``--preview``.
When ``--preview`` is enabled, the script opens the environment in an interactive debugging mode. This mode is for inspection and does not save datasets.


Useful CLI arguments:

- **--gym_config**: Path to the task JSON configuration.
- **--action_config**: Path to the action-bank configuration.
- **--num_envs**: Number of environments to run in parallel.
- **--device**: Simulation device, such as ``cpu`` or ``cuda``.
- **--headless**: Run without GUI for faster generation.
- **--enable_rt**: Enable ray tracing for higher-quality visual observations.
- **--preview**: Launch the environment in interactive preview mode.
- **--filter_dataset_saving**: Disable dataset saving for debugging.

For the complete CLI argument list, see :doc:`CLI Reference </guides/cli>`.

Outputs
~~~~~~~

After successful execution, completed episodes are saved under the configured dataset root. A LeRobot dataset typically contains:

If no explicit save path is provided and ``EMBODICHAIN_DATASET_ROOT`` is not set, ``LeRobotRecorder`` uses ``~/.cache/embodichain_datasets`` as the default dataset root.

- **data/**: Recorded action and state data.
- **videos/**: Camera observations saved as videos when ``use_videos=True``.
- **meta/**: Dataset metadata such as task information and robot description.

Dataset folders are automatically numbered, which makes it easy to run repeated generations without overwriting previous results.

In a practical workflow, the output of this stage is the synthesized dataset itself. Later training scripts typically consume these saved LeRobot episodes instead of regenerating trajectories each time.

Best Practices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Keep the config pair together**: Version ``gym_config.json`` and ``action_config.json`` together for action-bank tasks.
- **Use valid scripted policies**: Make sure ``create_demo_action_list()`` returns executable trajectories for the current scene.
- **Use ``--headless`` for throughput**: Disable the GUI when generating large datasets.
- **Use ``--preview`` and ``--filter_dataset_saving`` for debugging**: Inspect task logic without writing datasets.
- **Discard invalid rollouts**: Keep the default validation logic so failed trajectories are not saved.
